Thank you for taking the time. I want this to feel like a working session, not a one-way presentation.
So I'm going to walk you through how I think about building LLM systems and organization can
actually depend on. I'll cover the four areas you asked about, production rag architecture,
a real case study with hard numbers, my evaluation approach, and the tooling ecosystem I lean on.
I've left plenty of room for questions, so please stop me whenever something connects to a problem
you're working through. I'm Munshul Sharma, 13 years in production systems, Masters in software
engineering, author of rag in production, an inventor of the ILEI architecture for LLM's,
patent pending with the USBTO. Take away a trajectory, not a job list. Each phase built the lens I
bring to AI now. Distributed systems taught me to think about failure modes before the happy path.
Agentic systems taught me to contain non-determinism with contracts and fallbacks.
That framing transfers directly to language models. I don't see a model. I see a distributed system
with a probabilistic component in the critical path, and that changes every architectural decision.
My operating principle, treat the language model as the least reliable component,
and architect everything around containing and measuring that uncertainty. In an environment
where a confidently wrong answer has real cost, you need deterministic structure around a probabilistic
core. If you ask most people what a rag implementation looks like, this is it. Chunk your documents,
embed them, drop them in a vector database, retrieve top-k, hand the context to the model,
get an answer. And honestly, this is a reasonable way to prove a concept in an afternoon.
I've built this pipeline many times. It demos beautifully. The problem isn't that it's wrong.
It's what it quietly assumes. Clean documents, no access sensitive content, no need for exact
term matching, and that you'll know when the model gets something wrong. The moment it meets real data,
real users, and real consequences, it breaks in specific, predictable ways. Fixed chunking
splits documents at arbitrary boundaries. Tables get split midrow. Code blocks get split
mid-function. Conclusions get cut from the caveats that make them accurate. Pure vector search fails
silently on exact terms. Part numbers, regulatory identifiers, domain-specific acronyms.
Semantic similarity gets you to the neighborhood and misses the specific document. No access control
means the system's surfaces chunks the requesting user was never authorized to see.
In a national lab environment, that's not a compliance footnote. It's a mission critical
failure baked into the architecture. And without an evaluation harness, hallucinations ship silently.
The model generates fluent, confident pros. You have no automated signal on whether any of
it is grounded in what you retrieved. You find out when a user catches it, or worse, when they don't.
Every one of these is a production requirement the demo quietly ignored.
The most important architectural decision I make. I split it into three distinct planes and treat
each one as a first-class engineering concern. The knowledge plane is offline, governed,
versioned, and reproducible. It runs as a batch process, not on the request path.
Every chunk that exits this plane carries metadata, source, section, version, access control identity,
PI classification tags, and full lineage. That metadata isn't decoration. It's how every
downstream decision gets made correctly. The serving plane is online and latency sensitive.
A query comes in, gets classified by input guardrails, expands to an embedding, hits hybrid retrieval
with ACL filtering already applied, gets re-ranked, assembled into a context window,
passed to the model, then validated by output guardrails before anything goes out.
Every stage has a latency budget and a defined failure behavior. The control plane spans both.
It's the evaluation harness that gates deployment, end-to-end distributed tracing,
access governance with full audit logs, semantic caching, and cost controls.
Here's why this separation matters. The knowledge plane and the serving plane fail differently,
scale differently, and are owned by different people. The knowledge plane is about correctness
over time. It can be slow, it can be batch, it just needs to be right. The serving plane is about
latency and safety. Every request needs to be fast and auditable. Conflating them is the root
cause of most production rag failures I've seen. Notice governance isn't a step at the end.
Access control identity, PI tags, and lineage travel with every chunk from the moment of ingestion.
ACLs are enforced at retrieval time, not display time. By the time a chunk reaches the model,
the authorization decision has already been made. Now go back to those red failures.
Fixed chunking, pure vector search, no access control, no evaluation, no guardrails.
Every single one is now a named, testable, independently owned capability in this architecture.
That's the difference between a demo and a system the lab can defend. The biggest lever
on quality is not which model you choose. It's whether the right context gets in front of the
model in the first place. The model can only be as good as what you handed. Hybrid retrieval,
dense vectors combined with sparse BM25 is non-negotiable in technical and scientific domains.
Pure semantic search is powerful but fails silently on exact terms. A specific part number,
a regulatory standard identifier, a precise acronym, dense embeddings get the general
neighborhood and miss the specific document. BM25 catches exact tokens. You need both signals
and a fusion layer that knows how to combine them. Reranking is the second major lever.
You pull a candidate set, maybe 50 documents, then run a cross encoder to Rescore relevance
against the actual query. Cross encoders are slower, but that joint comparison of query against
candidate produces dramatically better ordering. I've repeatedly seen re-ranking
produce larger quality improvements than switching to a more capable and more expensive model.
It's one of the highest return on investment changes you can make to a deployed system.
Structure-aware chunking is the third. Tables, code blocks, and conclusions with their
supporting caveats need to stay whole. If a results table gets split across two chunks,
neither is useful in isolation. I use document type specific chunkers,
and for heterogeneous sources, custom parsers rather than a generic text splitter.
On evaluation, I measure retrieval and generation completely separately because they fail for
completely different reasons. For retrieval, I track context precision and recall.
Did we retrieve the right evidence? Did we miss anything critical?
For generation, I track faithfulness. Is every claim grounded in what we retrieved
and answer relevance? The eval said is built with domain experts, not auto-generated.
It runs on every code change. Deployments are gated on it like a test suite.
If we can't measure it, we don't ship it. A fluent, confident, unsupported answer is the
most dangerous output a RAG system can produce. I'd rather the systems say,
I don't have enough information than hallucinate. In a high-stakes environment,
that refusal is a feature. Overconfidence is the failure mode that destroys long-term trust.
My most recent enterprise project was a knowledge assistant that unified
three systems engineers were losing hours across every day. A confluence Docs wiki,
public Slack channels, and JIRA, one interface to query everything.
The engineering was not simple. The hardest part wasn't the LLM. It was that each source
breaks differently and required a completely separate ingestion strategy. The wiki goes stale.
Documents from three years ago sit alongside documents from last week with no signal about
which is canonical. I addressed this with recency decay waiting and canonical URL deduplication,
so the most recently updated version always wins. Slack is conversational with no inherent
ground truth. A thread might span 40 messages with the answer buried in message 32. I rebuilt
threads as coherent units, extracted question and answer pairs were detectable, and applied a
hard filter. Public channels only, enforced at ingestion time, not at query time. The access
control decision for slack had to be made during ingest. It was the only safe and variant. JIRA
is half structured fields and half freeform comment chains. The resolution comment often
contains the actual answer. The ticket title is the category. I built field-aware parsers that
weight resolve tickets higher and maintain link graph relationships between related issues.
All three normalize into one unified access controlled versioned index. Here's the whole
system into end. Three ingestion lanes, each with its own parsing logic converging into a
single version knowledge plane. Every chunk carries its access control identity from the moment it's
written. The serving plane starts with identity resolution. Every request maps to an authenticated
user via OIDC, then to group memberships, then to what's retrievable. That ACL filter runs at
the vector store query level. Unauthorized chunks are never retrieved, never ranked, never assembled.
The data never reaches the model in the first place. Input guardrails scope the query,
check for injection patterns, flag PI. Hybrid retrieval runs BM25 plus dense KNN, ACL filtered.
The cross encoder re-ranker scores the top candidates. The LLM generates a grounded response.
An LLM as judge scores groundedness before the answer leaves the system. Low faithfulness means
refuse or regenerate, not pass through. The control plane gates everything. The evaluation
harness as a deployment gate, open telemetry tracing on every span, governance logs, and
thumbs up, thumbs down feedback feeding continuously back into the eval set. Nothing ships without
passing the eval gate. Here's what it delivered in production. Median time to answer dropped by 80%.
Engineers who used to spend 15 minutes hunting across three systems were getting answers in under
90 seconds. Across the org that compounded to over 30,000 hours saved year over year. Faithfulness on
our evaluation set held above 0.92. Engineers went from three interfaces to one. What I learned,
per source ingestion strategy matters more than the LLM choice. The model was almost a commodity
decision. The engineering value was in the ingestion design, the chunking, the retrieval,
and the evaluation harness. Every meaningful quality improvement came from retrieval and
chunking changes, not model upgrades. Hybrid retrieval plus re-ranking beat a model upgrade
every time we ran the comparison. An eval harness built with subject matter experts was the only
way we could ship with confidence. The domain experts caught failure modes our engineering team
never would have thought to write test cases for. The trade off I made consciously and would make
again precision over coverage. Refuse over guess when retrieval confidence is low. More,
I don't have enough information responses in the early rollout. One confident wrong answer in the
first two weeks destroys trust that takes months to rebuild. High recall is a long term goal. High
precision from day one is how you earn the right to expand scope. The part I'm proudest of isn't
the architecture. It's that I got security, data owners, legal, and subject matter experts
aligned on access policy before we wrote a line of production code. The evaluation gate moved the
team from it looks good to me to measured, auditable, and defensible. I'm opinionated about tooling,
but loyal to capabilities, not vendors. On orchestration, Langchain and LAMA index are excellent for
prototyping. You get to a working demo in hours. In production, I keep a thin custom layer on the
critical path, retrieval, assembly, guardrails, so I can instrument it, test it, and swap components
without untangling of frameworks abstractions. The framework is a scaffold, not a permanent
dependency. On models, I evaluate on capability per dollar, latency, and whether the model can
operate inside the security boundary. In a national lab environment, that last criterion
often dominates every other. Open weight models like LAMA and Mistral earn their place not
primarily because they're cheaper, they're often not, once you factor in infrastructure,
but because they can run inside the air gap. Frontier models like CLOD and GPT for a best-in-class
for complex reasoning, but they require data to leave the security perimeter. You need a clear
policy on which workload classifications can use which model tier. On vector stores,
put vector for teams already on Postgres who want minimal operational overhead,
Milvis or Kdrant at scale with complex filtering, Azure AI search for native hybrid retrieval
in enterprise Azure environments. The decision is almost never about raw performance. It's about
ACL metadata filtering support and what your infrastructure team can operate it to in the morning.
On evaluation, ROGA style metrics for retrieval and generation separately,
custom harnesses for domain-specific cases, LLM as judge calibrated against human expert labels.
The tooling matters less than the process. The eval set must be built with people who know
what correct looks like. On observability, I won't ship an LLM system without self-hosted
length use wired to open telemetry. Every retrieval, every model call, every guardrail decision
needs to be traceable end-to-end. Cost attribution and latency profiling need to be
on by default. In a deterministic outcomes environment, I won't hand reliability to a
system I can't trace, test or explain. Let me pull this together. The goal of any LLM system
in a mission critical environment shouldn't be can we build a working demo. It should be,
can we build something the organization can defend, audit and trust at scale? Can we measure it?
Can we explain why it's right? Can we improve it without guessing?
Every decision I've walked you through, the three-plane architecture, hybrid retrieval with
re-ranking, evaluation as a deployment gate, ACL enforcement at retrieval time.
Those aren't complexity for its own sake.